Design for all-or-nothing semantics for workload resource assignment (#433)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/349-avoid-coscheduling/README.md

-->

<!-- toc -->
- [KEP-349: Avoid concurrent pod scheduling for workloads](#kep-349-avoid-concurrent-pod-scheduling-for-workloads)
  - [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [User Stories (Optional)](#user-stories-optional)
      - [Story 1](#story-1)
      - [Story 2](#story-2)
    - [Notes/Contraints/Caveats (Optional)](#notescontraintscaveats-optional)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Design Details](#design-details)
    - [Ready workload condition](#ready-workload-condition)
    - [Workload API](#workload-api)
    - [Job annotations](#job-annotations)
      - [Wait for pod scheduling](#wait-for-pod-scheduling)
      - [Pod scheduled timeout seconds](#pod-scheduled-timeout-seconds)
    - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
        - [Prerequisite testing updates](#prerequisite-testing-updates)
      - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
      - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
    - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
  - [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

> This proposal introduces a mechanism for avoid co-scheduling of workload pods.

Reviewer: co-scheduling is already a term that we use somewhere else.

```suggestion
This proposal introduces a mechanism to avoid concurrent scheduling of pods from different workloads,
if they require all-or-nothing scheduling guarantees.
```

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

### Goals

- a mechanism to avoid concurrent scheduling of pods for workloads.
<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

### Non-Goals

- guarantee that two workloads would not schedule pods concurrently. Example
scenarios in which two workloads may still concurrently schedule their pods:
  - when succeeded pods are replaced with new because job's parallelism is less than its completions;
  - when a failed pod gets replaced.

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

We introduce a mechanism to mark a Job as blocking admission of further
workloads until the first batch of its pods is scheduled, more precisely, until:

> `job.status.ready + job.status.succeeded >= job.spec.parallelism`.

Reviewer: Also say that this is an option for the workload

Author: Added a note

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a machine learning researcher I want to run a large workload, comprising
thousands of pods which need to all run at the same time. Scheduling all pods

> in this workload takes up to 20min and I want to have a guarantee that other

Reviewer: 20 min doesn't sound realistic.

The more realistic scenario is with long running jobs with tens of pods. Autoscaling+scheduling could take a couple of minutes. The thing is that autoscaling could face stockouts.

Author: Adjusted the description

workloads scheduled within this time interval would not delay execution of my
workload.

My use can be supported by adding `kueue.x-k8s.io/wait-for-pod-scheduling`
annotation to the jobs I run.

#### Story 2

As an administrator of the batch processing platform I want to be able to
configure kueue quotas for on-demand resources a little higher than what is
available in the quiet period. However, I don't want to risk two workloads
deadlock in case of issues with provisioning nodes to satisfy the configured
quota.

My use can be supported by adding `kueue.x-k8s.io/wait-for-pod-scheduling`
annotation to all jobs. I could also designate a single local queue
`wait-for-pod-scheduling-queue` to be responsible for such workloads and only
add the annotation based on the value of the `kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name`
annotation. This way we could allow for coscheduling of workloads if the local

> queue is not used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
queue is used.
```
?

Author: The idea was to have two local queues:
- (main) one for regular jobs
- (exclusive scheduling) one for jobs that require all pods to be scheduled at the same time.

The batch platform could add the `wait-for-pods-scheduled` annotation based on the selected localqueue. This was users of the platform would need to only care about selecting the queue. However, it would mean that users could send their jobs to the wrong queues and still cause issues. 

Let me skip this extension and we can later add as a dedicated story if needed.

### Notes/Contraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

If the workload fails to schedule its pods it could block admission of other
workloads indefinitely.

> In order to mitigate this risk we terminate workloads which don't have enough

Reviewer: which timeout or where is it defined? And what happens to the workload? is it put back into the queue?

Author: The timeout would be defined at a Job level by annotation. I see two options:
- terminate the job (can be now done using the TargetFailure condition) and delete the workload, or
- suspend the job and requeue the workload. 

However, the lack of timeout is a problem also currently as accumulated admitted workloads which fail to schedule will block further admission. Thus, I'm thinking of deferring the work and design properly under a dedicated KEP.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Ready workload condition

First, we introduce a new workload condition, called `Ready`, to denote workloads
which have their pods scheduled, more precisely, which satisfy the condition:
`job.status.ready + job.status.succeeded >= job.spec.parallelism`.
The condition is added by the kueue's Job controller when it reconciles a job on
a Job status update. Note that, verifying the condition does not require extra
API calls to the job or individual pods.

### Workload API

We extend the Workload API in order to specify the strategy

```golang
// WorkloadSpec defines the desired state of Workload
type WorkloadSpec struct {
  ...
  // waitForPodsScheduled is true indicates that the workload blocks admission

>   // of all other workloads until it is in the Ready condition. Further, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // of all other workloads in the cluster until it is in the Ready condition. Further, it
```
?

>   // delays its corresponding job start until all other admitted workloads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // delays admission of this workload until all other admitted workloads
```

Author: Actually, I meant what is written. We want to delay the job start if there are any other admitted workloads which are still not ready.

  // are in the Ready condition. If false, then the workloads starts once
  // admitted. Also, it does not block admission of other workloads. The null
  // value, results in the same behavior as false.
	waitForPodsScheduled *bool `json:"schedulingStrategy,omitempty"`
}
```

### Job annotations

We use the mechanism of job annotations to translate them into the desired
workload properties.

#### Wait for pod scheduling

We introduce a new Job annotation, called `kueue.x-k8s.io/wait-for-pod-scheduling`,
to indicate that the workload corresponing to this job should block admission
of other workloads until it is scheduled. Further, workloads with this annotation
wait with unsuspending the corresponding job until all other admitted workloads
have their pods scheduled.

#### Pod scheduled timeout seconds

> We introduce a new annotation, called `kueue.x-k8s.io/pods-scheduled-timeout-seconds`,

Reviewer: in the Job?

Author: Clarified

to terminate any workloads which don't have their pods scheduled within the
specified time since unsuspending of the corresponding job.

> If the annotation is not specified the timeout fallbacks to `1s` per pod + `30s`

Reviewer: Maybe by default there is no timeout? Not sure.

Author: Yes, I'm hesitant too. It is also sort of a problem today, so maybe it can be done but decoupled from this KEP?

considered stable.

If the feature you are introducing has high complexity, consider adding graduation
milestones with these graduation criteria:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

> <!--

Reviewer: It makes admission extremely slow. The feature should only be used if it's known that the cluster mostly has long running jobs, and it doesn't have spikes of jobs.

Author: Added a note

  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories (Optional)](#user-stories-optional)
    - [Story 1](#story-1)
    - [Story 2](#story-2)
  - [Notes/Contraints/Caveats (Optional)](#notescontraintscaveats-optional)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [PodsScheduled workload condition](#podsscheduled-workload-condition)
  - [Workload API](#workload-api)
  - [Job annotation](#job-annotation)
  - [The mechanism](#the-mechanism)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
      - [Prerequisite testing updates](#prerequisite-testing-updates)
    - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
    - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Timeout on reaching the PodsScheduled condition](#timeout-on-reaching-the-podsscheduled-condition)
    - [Delay job start instead of workload admission](#delay-job-start-instead-of-workload-admission)
    - [Block job start only if two workloads overlap in flavors](#block-job-start-only-if-two-workloads-overlap-in-flavors)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

> This proposal introduces an opt-in mechanism to avoid concurrent scheduling of

Author: I think so, but "Pod Resource Reservation" is an effort which requires changes to k8s, so at least >6 months to graduate to be used by default (at least two release cycles), but even then some users may have their reasons to stay with older versions of k8s.

The proposal here is a short-term solution which does not preclude the long-term effort, but is only scoped to Kueue. 

It is a nice to have if some APIs can be reused.

> This proposal introduces an opt-in mechanism to avoid concurrent scheduling of

Author: Added a note in alternatives.

style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

## Motivation

Some workloads need all pods to be running at the same time to make progress, for
example, when they require pod-to-pod communication. In that case a large
workload may have difficulty scheduling all of its pods for a prolonged time as
smaller workloads would continue to block the slots. Moreover, a pair of
workloads may deadlock if the amount of actual resources available is below the
quota configured to determine admission.

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

### Goals

> - a mechanism to avoid concurrent scheduling of pods for workloads.

Author: sounds good - applied

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

### Non-Goals

- guarantee that two workloads would not schedule pods concurrently. Example
scenarios in which two workloads may still concurrently schedule their pods:
  - when succeeded pods are replaced with new because job's parallelism is less than its completions;
  - when a failed pod gets replaced

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

> We introduce a mechanism to avoid concurrent scheduling of Job pods. More

Reviewer 2: I'm still unclear about this goal of this KEP.🤔

> We introduce a mechanism to avoid concurrent scheduling of Job pods. More

Author: Yeah, the goal is to ensure that a workload has all its resources allocated. Sequencing the admission is just a method that is currently available to Kueue.

precisely, we block admission of new workloads until the first batch of the
Job is scheduled. Additionally, we await with starting the Job until all other
admitted workloads have their pods scheduled. This behavior can be opted-in by
a Job by a new annotation.

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a machine learning researcher I want to run a workload, comprising tens of
pods which need to all run at the same time. Autoscaling the cluster and
scheduling of all pods in this workload take a couple of minutes and I want to

> have a guarantee that other workloads scheduled within this time interval would

Author: added

not delay execution of my workload.

> My use can be supported by adding `kueue.x-k8s.io/wait-for-pods-scheduled`

Author: Rephrased the stories, hope it is clearer now.

annotation to the jobs I run.

#### Story 2

As an administrator of a batch processing in my organization I want to be able
to configure kueue quotas for on-demand resources a little higher than what is
available in the quiet period. However, I don't want to risk two workloads

> deadlock in case of issues with provisioning nodes to satisfy the configured

Author: I was thinking about the same priorities , or unspecified priorities when the native k8s preemption does not help.

quota.

My use can be supported by adding `kueue.x-k8s.io/wait-for-pods-scheduled`
annotation to all jobs.

### Notes/Contraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

If the workload fails to schedule its pods it could block admission of other
workloads indefinitely.

> The risk can be mitigated by using the Job's `ActiveDeadlineSeconds` timeout

Reviewer 2: It's really a serious problem, when other types of jobs do not support this feature. Even for native batch Job, pods can't run successfully for various of reasons besides resource problems.

Author: Agree with the sentiment, was just considering decoupling it from this proposal  as it is already an issue to some extent. Still, moved it to Design Details as the need was expressed by reviewers.

to terminate a started job, which results in finishing the associated workload.

Still the mitigation might be problematic as the timeout needs to include both
the scheduling and execution time for a job, thus needs to be higher than one
would want.

Thus, we consider introduction of timeout on reaching the `PodsScheduled`
condition by a workload since its job start (see:
[Timeout on reaching the PodsScheduled condition](#timeout-on-reaching-the-podsscheduled-condition))

> as a possible future improvement.

Reviewer 3: I think we need this now, we can't block forever.

Author: I see, moving it out from Alternatives

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### PodsScheduled workload condition

First, we introduce a new workload condition, called `PodsScheduled`, to indicate

> that the first batch of workload's pods is scheduled, more precisely:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that the first batch of a workload's pods is scheduled, more precisely:
```

> `job.status.ready + job.status.succeeded >= job.spec.parallelism`.

Reviewer 3: Explain that job controllers are responsible for populating this condition and then discuss how we are doing it for v1.Job in a separate paragraph.

Author: The condition is  populated by the Kueue's Job reconciler. Rephrased and used the Job reconciler name vs job controller to avoid confusion.

Author: Thanks for the high-level perspective. 
Re 1: I renamed the uses of workload to job to avoid the confusion.
Re 2: Indeed, it could be an argument against setting the annotation on Job. Not sure if it outweights the other pros. I have updated the review: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/433#discussion_r1033359206. Going to also put these into alternatives. Another possibility would be to keep the workload API field, but populate it based on the local queue configuration. WDYT? It would mean that the admin needs to set up a local queue with the configuration, so that the users sent their workloads there. On the other side, it means there is no need for the new Job annotation.

Author: Added the discussion into the notes section in the doc. 
After the note I'm leaning to using LocalQueue API fields (for opting in and timeout declaration).

Author: /hold let's hold until we have more opinions on this, in particular: Jobs annotation vs. LocalQueue API field.

Reviewer 3: We have a long term plan to use LocalQueue as a place for workload defaulting, I wouldn't add it now though, lets give the feature time to soak a bit, so perhaps starting with an annotation on the Job API is a good first step.

Author: There are a couple of advantages which LocalQueue seems to have:
- it does not leak implementation to JobReconciler, allowing to keep it lean as a reference implementation of the CRD <> Workload integration (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/433#discussion_r1034128187). 
- it would also be a natural place for the timeout, currently the opt-in and related timeout are on two opposite ends of the concepts. Then, it allows you to have two LocalQueues, so that the timeouts could be different for large and small jobs.

In terms of implementation complexity, I think it is similar, but we have already a webhook for validating LocalQueue, and if we want to validate the job annotation we would need to introduce a new one. 

I also think that in terms of the "first step" it also seems more natural to stay within Kueue concepts.

Reviewer 3: A couple of thoughts/history:

1) The integration controllers should be lean, there is no disagreement, it is a principle we have been trying to maintain since day 1 :). 
2)  Any workload level API that we expose can be populated by the integration controller, we will not intentionally block that.
3) LocalQueue can be thought of as a place for defaulting workload parameters, this was one of the design goals of LocalQueue.

> it does not leak implementation to JobReconciler, allowing to keep it lean as a reference implementation of the CRD <> Workload integration (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/433#discussion_r1034128187).

If we want this to continue to have this as a workload level API (with an extension in the future to be defaulted via LocalQueue), then this is not leaking. As for complexity, as I mentioned on the other comment, we will have that no matter what option we choose because we need to translate pod ready status to a condition on the workload. 

> I also think that in terms of the "first step" it also seems more natural to stay within Kueue concepts.

My thinking is that we want to be very careful when adding new fields to ClusterQueue and LocalQueue since those are user-facing apis and we need to be very careful when adding new fields to them. While the Workload API is intended as a gluing layer that we may have a bit more wiggle room to experiment with, while at the same time adding an annotation to the job api is simple to deprecate.

The condition is added by the kueue's Job controller when it reconciles a job on
a Job status update. Note that, verifying the condition does not require extra
API calls to the job or individual pods.

### Workload API

We extend the Workload API with the new `waitForPodsScheduled` field to
enable the new behavior.

```golang
// WorkloadSpec defines the desired state of Workload
type WorkloadSpec struct {
  ...
  // waitForPodsScheduled, when true, indicates that the workload blocks
  // admission of other workloads in the cluster until it is in the
  // `PodsScheduled` condition. Further, it delays admission of such workloads
  // until all other admitted workloads are in the `PodsScheduled` condition.
  // If false, the workload starts as soon as it is admitted and it does not
  // block admission of other workloads. The `null` value results in the same
  // behavior as `false`.

> 	waitForPodsScheduled *bool `json:"waitForPodsScheduled,omitempty"`

Author: Maybe also worth considering:
- PodScheduling (`AllOrNothing`, `BestEffort`)
- PodResources (`AllOrNothing`, `BestEffort`)

> 	waitForPodsScheduled *bool `json:"waitForPodsScheduled,omitempty"`

Author: After a discussion with @alculquicondor and @ahg-g renamed the field to the following:
`StartupRequirements`: `QuotaOnly`, `QuotaAndPodsReady`

> 	avoidConcurrentPodScheduling *bool `json:"avoidConcurrentPodScheduling,omitempty"`

Reviewer: when building APIs, it's better to avoid double negation, like `avoidX=false`

You could say something like `WaitForPodsScheduled` or the opposite `AllowConcurrentPodScheduling`, with the default true.

And match the annotation to that.

Author: Indeed, returned to the original proposal `waitForPodsScheduled` which sounds best given the currently available options. I guess what I don't particularly like about it sounds a little more imperative than declarative, and I like declarative APIs. Still, better than `AllowConcurrentPodScheduling` IMO. 

Alternatively, WDYT about an enum "SchedulingStrategy" with possible values `Default` (nil) and `AvoidConcurrent` (to enable the mechanism).

Reviewer: enum is not bad. You need a better name than "Default" though.

Author: Marking resolved as we already use enums

}
```

### Job annotation

We introduce a new Job annotation, called `kueue.x-k8s.io/avoid-concurrent-pod-scheduling`,
as a JobAPI counterpart of the `avoidConcurrentPodScheduling` Workload API field. When
the annotation is present, the field value is set as `true` during workload
creation.

### The mechanism

When a workload with `avoidConcurrentPodScheduling=true` is nominated for admission,

> kueue scheduler blocks its admission (and of other workloads nominated in

Reviewer: for the cluster, or the ClusterQueue?

Author: for the entire cluster - added a note to clarify. We care about the underlying cluster nodes.

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

#### Timeout on reaching the PodsScheduled condition

We considered introduction of a timeout  to terminate any workloads which don't
reach the `PodsScheduled` condition within the specified time since unsuspending
of the corresponding job.

If the annotation is not specified the timeout fallbacks to `1s` per pod + `30s`
of overhead. For example, the timeout for a workload comprising 100 pods would
fallback to 130s.

**Reasons for discarding/deferring**

It is also an issue currently, that admitted workloads which fail to schedule
their pods may block the queue resources indefinetely, blocking further
admission. Thus, it makes sense to do it as a seperate KEP.

#### Delay job start instead of workload admission

When a workload with `waitForPodsScheduled=true` is nominated its admission is
blocked (rejected) until all the already admitted workloads are in the `PodsScheduled`
condition. Instead, we could admit the workload, but delay its job start

> until the condition is satisfied.

Reviewer 3: Do you mean the kueue job controller delays unsuspending the job until all other previously admitted workloads reaches the `PodsScheduled` condition? If so, the main reason for discarding this option is leaking implementation details of the feature to the job controller.

Author: Extended the sentence to clarify.

assigned by avoiding concurrent scheduling of workloads. More precisely, we
block admission of new workloads until the first batch of the Job is scheduled.
Additionally, we await with starting the Job until all other admitted workloads
have their pods scheduled. This behavior can be opted-in by a Job by a new
annotation.

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a machine learning researcher I want to run a workload, comprising tens of
pods that all need to run at the same time. Autoscaling the cluster and

> cheduling of all pods in this workload take a couple of minutes and other

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure about 'scheduling' and 'can occupy the resources my workloads could use otherwise'. Does it assume that some workloads schedule outside of Kueue? If everything goes through Kueue and ClusterQueue is configured consistently with capacity, scheduling should be still correct (the problem is with autoscaling/provisioning, or other start issues beyond ClusterQueue control).

Btw. do we envision other start issues than provisioning? Do we want to handle them? We sort of do with the proposed solution. It may have consequences for the naming. I considered atomic-provisioning=true, but since it covers other start issues, maybe ensure-pods-start is more appropriate and direct.

> cheduling of all pods in this workload take a couple of minutes and other

Author: cleanup up

workloads scheduled within this interval can occupy the resources my workload
could use otherwise, potentially forcing additional scale-up events. I would
like to be sure that my workload, once admitted, can get resources allocated to
all pods without an unnecessary delay.

> My use can be supported by adding `kueue.x-k8s.io/workload-startup-requirements: QuotaAndProdsReady`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
My use case can be supported by adding `kueue.x-k8s.io/workload-startup-requirements: QuotaAndPodsReady`
```

Author: Fixed

annotation to the jobs I run.

#### Story 2

As an administrator of a batch processing in my organization I want to be able

> to configure kueue quotas for on-demand resources a little higher than what is

Author: Indeed, I've deleted the part of the sentence. I think it still makes sense to keep two stories as they demonstrate two different perspectives.

available in the quiet period. However, I don't want to risk two workloads
deadlock in case of issues with provisioning nodes to satisfy the configured
quota. This could happen when the job corresponding to these workloads don't
specify priorities or specify the same priority.

> My use can be supported by adding `kueue.x-k8s.io/workload-startup-requirements: QuotaAndProdsReady`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
My use case can be supported by adding `kueue.x-k8s.io/workload-startup-requirements: QuotaAndPodsReady`
```

Author: Fixed

annotation to all jobs.

### Notes/Contraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

If the workload fails to schedule its pods it could block admission of other
workloads indefinitely.

> To mitigate this issue we introduce introduce a timeout on reaching the `PodsReady`

Author: cleaned up

condition by a workload since its job start (see:
[Timeout on reaching the PodsReady condition](#timeout-on-reaching-the-podsready-condition)).

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### PodsReady workload condition

First, we introduce a new workload condition, called `PodsReady`, to indicate
that the first batch of a workload's pods is scheduled, more precisely:

> `job.status.ready + job.status.succeeded >= job.spec.parallelism`.

Reviewer 4: What about job.status.failed? What if pods fail quickly before we notice they were ready? And if we do count "ready in the past, but now terminated", maybe PodsStarted as a name?

Reviewer: I think counting failed pods actually make sense. If the workload is a buggy one, we don't want to clog the queue waiting for it to have running or succeeded pods.

Author: Failed pods are counted already towards the `job.spec.backoffLimit` so a buggy workload would be eliminated based on exceeding the backoff limit. Seems good enough, let me add a sentence in this section.

The `PodsReady` condition is addded to the workload by the Kueue's Job
reconciler in reaction to a status update of the corresponding Job. Note that,
verifying if the condition should be added does not require an extra API call as
the Kueue's Job reconciller already fetches the latest Job object at the
beginning of the `Reconcile` function. Also note, there is no new condition
introduced to the Job API.

### Workload API

We extend the Workload API with the new `startupRequirements` field to
enable the new behavior.

```golang
// StartupRequirements describes workload startup requirements
type StartupRequirements string

const (
  // QuotaAndPodsReady means that workload requires all pods to be running at
  // the same time

>   StartupRequirementsQuotaAndPodsReady StartupRequirements = "QuotaAndPodsReady"

Reviewer 4: StartRequirements? (shorter, simpler)

Author: Out of StartupRequirements vs StartRequirements I prefer StartupRequirements which reflects more on time and effort to start "If something takes some time to get fully started, start up can have that implication too." https://ell.stackexchange.com/questions/104319/start-vs-start-up. 

Also, technically the workload gets started as soon as the Job is unsuspended, so maybe Start/ Startup is not best after all. How about: `RunRequirements` or `ProgressRequirements`?

Reviewer: `Start` is good. It matches the `StartTime` of the Job.

Author: Wouldn't actually be misleading, because `StartTime` in job points to the moment of unsuspending, whereas the `StartupRequirements` , but QuotaAndPodsReady value point to the moment when all pods are ready.

Author: So `StartupRequirements` would mark the distinction actually or we can go further and name it `RunningRequirements`,

Reviewer: It's about the requirements we have before starting the job. But sure, in the first implementation we will also block after we already started the Job.

I don't have a strong opinion. Both `Start` and `Startup` are ok with me.

Reviewer: I'm also ok with `Running`

  // QuotaOnly means that the only requirement for a workload to start is to

>   // get resources from the cluster quota

Author: yes, it is about ClusterQuota queue. For now, improve field docs for this. Since ClusterQueue quota is the only quota introduced by Kueue for now maybe it is acceptable, and it is a short name.

>   // get resources from the cluster quota

Reviewer 3: hmm, I think the context here is clear, quota in Kueue docs refers to Kueue-managed quota in ClusterQueues.

>   // QuotaAndProdsReady means that workload requires all pods to be running at
>   // the same time
>   StartupRequirementsQuotaAndProdsReady StartupRequirements = "QuotaAndProdsReady"
>   // QuotaOnly means that the only requirement for a workload to start is to
>   // get resources from the cluster quota
>   StartupRequirementsQuotaOnly StartupRequirements = "QuotaOnly"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // QuotaAndPodsReady means that workload requires all pods to be running at
  // the same time
  StartupRequirementsQuotaAndPodsReady StartupRequirements = "QuotaAndPodsReady"
  // QuotaOnly means that the only requirement for a workload to start is to
  // get resources from the cluster quota
  StartupRequirementsQuotaOnly StartupRequirements = "QuotaOnly"
```

Author: Fixed

)

// WorkloadSpec defines the desired state of Workload
type WorkloadSpec struct {
  ...
  // StartupRequirements describes the workload requirement on the resource allocation.
  // Possible values are:

>   // - QuotaAndProdsReady: means that workload requires allocation of resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // - QuotaAndPodsReady: means that workload requires allocation of resources
```

Author: Fixed

  //   to support running of all pods at the same time,
  // - QuotaOnly: means that the workload does not require all pods to be running
  //   at the same time.
  // Defaults to QuotaOnly.
  StartupRequirements *string `json:"startupRequirements,omitempty"`
}
```

### Job annotation

> We introduce a new Job annotation, called `kueue.x-k8s.io/workload-startup-requirements`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We introduce a new Job annotation, called `kueue.x-k8s.io/startup-requirements`,
```

Workload is mostly an internal concept that people that right Jobs don't need to know about.

Author: Adjusted

as a JobAPI counterpart of the `startupRequirements` Workload API field. When
the annotation is present, its value is used as the field value during workload

> creation. Unknown value of the annotation results in leaving the field

Author: Makes sense, added a note on a validation hook. This may not be necessary if we turn to use LocalQueue fields instead of Job annotations.

as null.

### The mechanism

> When a workload with `startupRequirements=QuotaAndProdsReady` is nominated for admission,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a workload with `startupRequirements=QuotaAndPodsReady` is nominated for admission,
```

> kueue scheduler blocks its admission (and admission of other workloads nominated

Reviewer 2: Workloads nominated in this cycle may belong to different clusterQueues, then no need to block each other since they're isolated, no?

Author: Workloads in different cluster queues still use the same cluster, and so may use the same cluster resources underneath, unless using flavors corresponding to disjoint resources, but there is no guarantee on this.

Reviewer 2: I understand that under these scenarios 
- workloads in the same clusterQueue
- clusterQueues under the the same cohort

we may have resource deadlock for they're sharing with each other, but for clusterQueues under different cohorts, the assumption is that clusterQueues are fine divided by administrator(maybe we should better document that one node should only belong to one resource flavor and one clusterQueue), so I think we should take them as resource isolated, then there's no need to avoid coscheduling between them. cc @alculquicondor @ahg-g for thoughts.

But I agree with startup with a strict and simple implementation anyway.

in this cycle) until all already admitted workloads are in the `PodsReady`
state. Kueue scheduler verifies this condition by a lookup to the cache
of admitted workloads. When two or more such workloads are nomitated in a given
cycle only one of them is admitted.

Once such a workload is admitted, kueue's scheduler blocks admission of further
workloads until the workload has the `PodsReady` condition. Similarly
as in the previous case, Kueue's scheduler verifies the workload state by

> a lookup to the cache of admitted workloads.

Author: The fact that a workload is admitted is stored in the field: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/aecac6d0168d9f204072b84eb48f5711425d1c24/apis/kueue/v1alpha2/workload_types.go#L41 so it can information in cache can be repopulated on the next startup of the kueue.

> Note that, there is at most one workload with `startupRequirements=QuotaAndProdsReady` admitted

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that, there is at most one workload with `startupRequirements=QuotaAndPodsReady` admitted
```

Author: Fixed

- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

N/A

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

Delaying of workload admission until all pods are scheduled may decrease
thoughput significantly. Especially, if there is enough resource capacity to
which could be otherwise used to start multiple jobs at the same time.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 4: Have you considered central configuration? I mean some kind of ensure-pods-start=true, but not on the Job, but on ClusterQueue or some central Kueue config (is there such a place?). Central is possibly simpler, easier for Batch admins and easier for CRD <> Workload integrations. Do we need the granularity of every job deciding differently?

Author: Yes, considered other options. Summarized the pros & cons in the remarks section now. I started off with Job, as it really depends on the job specificity if it requires all pods to be running at the same time. Setting it on queues would still require similar level of complexity from the implementation POV, so didn't see a point. However, there is a complexity added by introducing new Job annotation. As the contract on the objects to create workloads from gets bigger. Thus, the implementation in the Kueue's Job Reconciler would need to be also repeated for other CRDs, which could be avoided by the use of LocalQueues.

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

#### Delay job start instead of workload admission

When a workload with `startupRequirements=QuotaAndProdsReady` is nominated its admission is
blocked (rejected) until all the already admitted workloads are in the `PodsReady`
condition. Instead, we could admit the workload, but delay its job start
until the condition is satisfied.

**Reasons for discarding/deferring**

There is good candidate event that would re-trigger the job start as a change
in one workload (that got the `PodsReady` condition) would need to trigger
the job start in the admitted workload. One relatively easy solution would be
to create a goroutine which periodically monitors if the condition is satisfied,
but it seems an unnecessary complication as it would leak the implementation
details of Kueue scheduling to the Kueue job controller.

#### Block job start only if two workloads overlap in flavors

One possible optimization would be to allow admission of multiple workloads

> with `startupRequirements=QuotaAndProdsReady` and allow their concurrent scheduling if they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with `startupRequirements=QuotaAndPodsReady` and allow their concurrent scheduling if they
```

Author: cleaned up
